And with that, I think we're gonna
start jumping into how do we actually
play around with this, right?
It's the initial question is great
observables, they're wonderful.
All right.
How do I get my hands on
one of these observables?
How does one make an observable?
Right.
And there is like an observable
constructor where you can like hand roll
your own observables.
But in practice, we have a bunch of
very simple utility functions that will
produce an observable for us.
So what we're gonna do is,
we're gonna take a look at a few of them,
kind of just on a high level.
And then we're gonna actually kind of play
around with them, get our hands dirty and
write some tests,
just to kind of see how they work.
So let's kind of take a brief tour, and
then we will jump in and play around.
So the first helpful utility
method is one called of, right.
And of, takes a series of arguments and
what it does it makes
an observable of those values does,
right what it says on the tin right.
The other thing to keep in mind as
we look at this first example is
you'll notice that I named it
example dollar sign, right.
And we put it on the end because jQuery
already owns putting on the beginning
you don't have to do this.
If you hate this,
the dollar sign doesn't mean anything.
The dollar sign is just
a regular JavaScript variable.
It is helpful especially in a world where
you might not have TypeScript, right?
It is helpful for you and your friends
to know that this is an observable
stream that we're dealing with and
not a regular value.
Again something like TypeScript might
all the intelligence in the world might
handle this for
you don't necessarily have to do it falls
under the list of conventions that we do.
Like giving classes and constructors and
JavaScript capital letters.
All right, using dollar signs
in the beginning of like jQuery,
capitalizing react components so
on and so forth, right?
That is basically what it means
there's nothing special there.
It does not have any magic in and
of itself.
It is just an indicator.
Now because it is a stream, right,
we can't just use the observable
whenever we want,
we have to subscribe to it, all right?
And when you subscribe to it,
it will then, run through the values and
the observable.
Now of, just basically, shoots them all
right at you super fast, all right?
Basically synchronously they will
all fire, immediately at you.
And you can deal with them at that moment.
So of, is kind of its utility when we're
obviously gonna build to bigger and
better things are things like,
maybe as click events come in, well,
that could be an event.
I want my stream we might need
a different helper for that.
From API requests, so on and so
forth, but of is the simplest one.
It takes a series of arguments and
basically shoots them all at you in
an observable incredibly quickly,
also known as synchronously.
It has a friend,
that's friend is called from.
So this gonna take the value is raw,
whatever arguments, they're going in
there each value so on and so forth.
From we'll deal with a certain
set of values that it can try to
turn into an observer.
All right, so arrays are good for
that right, you just work your way through
the array really anything that is quote
unquote an iterable in JavaScript.
So anything that has symbol dot
iterator so that's basically, arrays,
generators, things like that.
It will basically work through
the values of that data structure and
send them to you.
It'll also work with promises because
that is, a really great example of like,
it'll basically wait for
the promise to resolve.
And if the promise resolves,
then it will give you that value as well.
So anything that is not necessarily
just a regular primitive value or
just the kind of pure thing
that you wanna use but
you'd like to turn one data
structure into an observable.
From is your buddy for
doing that as well, and
you can do generator functions you
just have to instantiate them and
it will basically work through
all the things that it yields.
We'll kind of see that in a little bit.
Like I said, promises.
Once the promise resolves,
you get the value.
So, from is a pretty useful tool as well
for turning other things into observables.
All right let's actually like let's
look at the difference for a second.
From is useful whenever it's kind
of like an observable that we want
to turn into one.
So that is arrays and
promises and generators.
Objects that have a subscribe method so
like anything that we would call like
observable like that adheres to
the interface of an observable,
it will turn it into a real observable.
So like svelte stores, for
instance, have a subscribe method.
You can basically turn it into
an observable read through the values, so
on and so forth.
For the nodding in the room like
spelt stores are basically like what
subjects in ArcGIS so
they play very nice nicely together.
There's nothing like an observable.
So any kinda primitive value and object
that doesn't necessarily adhere to the API
contract and observable,
we're gonna use and
just kinda shoot it through
the observable stream in this case.
All right, so if you looked at the
previous slide, you saw that we just gave,
we had subscribe, and
then we gave it a callback function.
Right, and that was what to
do when every value happened.
But that's great.
That assumes that everything
goes right all the time, right.?
And I don't know about you, but I don't
write code that does that all the time.
So there are two ways that we can
deal with the other pieces of this.
And if this stresses you out, it should.
You can actually pass it three
functions and it's tricky, right?
This actual syntax is currently
deprecated but not removed, but
still common enough that
we should talk about it.
It will take three functions as arguments.
The first one is what to do
when a value comes through.
The second one is what to do
when a error comes through if
something goes wrong something
throws midway through.
And the third one is what to do when
it's complete when the stream closes and
it's all done so if you have 1,2,3,4,
fours last value the observable completes.
Not all observables complete,
but 1, 2, 3, 4 does complete,
what you wanna do in that case, right?
The reason why the syntax is somewhat
squirrely is what happens if you do with
new values and also a completion event but
you don't care about there's.
We got like passing null in there
as a second argument, right.
If you only care about
the completion of the observable
then it's no your callback gross.
So you can see that as well.
So we don't like that.
It's deprecated.
There's kind of a different syntax,
which is kind of what we might see more
commonly which is you can give it
an object with next error and complete.
And so in this case,
if you only care about errors,
you give it an object with error key.
If you only care about complete, you
give it an object with the complete key.
If you only care about next,
whatever, right?
Whatever combination that you care about,
you can subscribe to it and
have those callback functions called.
So the rule of thumb that
we're going to kind of
use here is if you need an error complete
event we're gonna use the object.
Most of the times we only care about
the next event that comes through,
right in that case we can just
pass it a function and move on.
Right, so it only only if you
explicitly care do we need that second
syntax otherwise just the regular passing
at one function of what we wanna do with.
We'll go ahead and
work for us pretty well.
All right, we have a site
RxJSfundamentals.netlify dot.app.
And in other is a repo.
And that repo has a bunch
of sample applications.
And it has some tests and
it has everything I kind of wrote in here.
And what we're going to do is kind of take
it for a spin and first I am going to
kind of show us effectively like just
some of the syntax and action so
we can see it and
then you're gonna kind of take it along.
>> Are you gonna cover any
integration with frameworks or
TypeScript
>> No to TypeScript,
just brief mentions of frameworks at
the very end this is just getting
comfortable with the basics of this point.
In ArcGIS 7,
TypeScript is pretty well supported.
It's just you have to basically say
what the value starting out is.
And if you're gonna pipe it
through a bunch of operators,
which we'll talk about a little bit.
What the value at the end the actual
TypeScript support out of the box is
fairly solid.
But we'd find that under
advanced basics or advanced.
>> How does it know when
the event is completed?
Is there an underlying generator.
>> Under the hood, yeah, generates and
so some of them don't complete, right?
If you are in a little bit we'll see
the idea of one that kind of takes
an event listener.
Well, an event listener never completes,
right?
Or the could be a interval which might
not complete unless you step in and
tell it when it completes.
So a complete event if we can whip up some
code in a little second we're gonna see
this, but in the observable itself and
whatever you have is creating one where
it might iterate through all the values.
There's a method under
the hood called complete.
There's a method called next.
When you call the next method inside of
the observable which looks a lot like
generator.
It will send the next value out when
you call complete that signifies that
this is now completed some
of them never complete.
Some of them will complete after a very
brief amount of time you can kind of
control all of those things.
And we'll look at how to take
observables are never complete and
make them complete so on and so forth.
But effectively if you if familiar
with generators you can think of
next like yield and
complete like return, right.
So you can have number of values,
if you're writing your own from scratch,
then you could theoretically
call these methods otherwise.
We'll call it at the end of that list of
values from we'll call it either when it
hits the end of the iterable.
In this case, a generator or the array or
the promise resolves, there's usually
a thing that will trigger the completion
under the hood in the library itself.